Kevin Nolan MMT thesis 2017

/Kevin Nolan/

-  * *Introduction*
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: introduction
     :END:

   -  ** /*Motivation*/
         :PROPERTIES:
         :CUSTOM_ID: motivation
         :END:

   -  ** /*Project goals*/
         :PROPERTIES:
         :CUSTOM_ID: project-goals
         :END:

   -  ** /*Structure of thesis*/
         :PROPERTIES:
         :CUSTOM_ID: structure-of-thesis
         :END:

-  * *Background*
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: background
     :END:

   -  ** /*DAW analog metaphors*/
         :PROPERTIES:
         :CUSTOM_ID: daw-analog-metaphors
         :END:

One of the primary tools used by electronic musicians today for the
production of music is DAW and it's inherent metaphors based on analog
systems still reign supreme in the field (Bell, Hein, and Ratcliffe
2015). The familiar concepts of analog tape machines and mixers benefit
the novice user by offering a network of familiar and tangible real
world metaphors in which to carry out their creative work. However, as
well as the benefits that these types of metaphors bring, they also
impose some limitations and bring about certain biases. Musical ideas
that are difficult to realise can be left unexplored.

A particular criticism of the DAW is the difficulty in maintaining and
managing the editing of complex automation information. Automation is
the term given to the continuous altering of aspects of the sound and is
usually represented in lanes separate to the primary note pitch
information. It may be recorded in or drawn in by the producer.
Difficulties can arise, when multiple subtly interacting lines of
automation, such as pitch bends and filter changes are being
manipulated. William Coleman gives a particularly clear example of this
and outlines the difficulty of representing "portamento time", the time
it takes a note to slide from one to the next. The visual results can be
jarring, unintuitive and not reflective of the audio results.

Duignan (2008) describes a similar problem in his study that monitored
professional producers working in DAW environments (Duignan 2008, 156).
The particular problem identified by Duignan was that of processing one
off effects for single musical events. A number of convoluted processes
were observed, including bouncing the affected portion to audio,
duplicating the track, setting up a particular auxiliary for the effect
and controlling the effect with automation. In these cases, the
hierarchy imposed by the DAW gets in the way, where it could be modeled
quite elegantly in a more open program such as Max Msp. This,
unfortunately, raises the issue of drifting into the area of analytic
thinking and away from creative thinking, a combination that John Cage
advises against: "Don't try to create and analyse at the same time.
They're different processes." (Popova 2012) The need to explore
alternative metaphors is clear. A description of a promising alternative
metaphor, that of drawing/sketching will now be discussed.

-  

   -  ** /*Legacy systems*/
         :PROPERTIES:
         :CUSTOM_ID: legacy-systems
         :END:

-  Oramics
-  UPIC

-  

   -  ** /*Golan Levin et al*/
         :PROPERTIES:
         :CUSTOM_ID: golan-levin-et-al
         :END:

-  * *Similar work*
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: similar-work
     :END:

-  * *TODO My approach [0/2]*
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: todo-my-approach-02
     :END:

-  [ ] Come up with a title
-  [ ] Other stuff

-  

   -  ** /*Adding allowances for stylus*/
         :PROPERTIES:
         :CUSTOM_ID: adding-allowances-for-stylus
         :END:

   -  ** /*Key specifications*/
         :PROPERTIES:
         :CUSTOM_ID: key-specifications
         :END:

   -  ** /*Paper.js*/
         :PROPERTIES:
         :CUSTOM_ID: paper.js
         :END:

   -  ** /*Tone.js*/
         :PROPERTIES:
         :CUSTOM_ID: tone.js
         :END:

-  * *Execution*
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: execution
     :END:

   -  ** /*Early prototypes*/
         :PROPERTIES:
         :CUSTOM_ID: early-prototypes
         :END:

      -  *** *Melodypainter*
             :PROPERTIES:
             :CUSTOM_ID: melodypainter
             :END:

Thus far, some early test prototypes to establish possible directions
for the application have been built. A Max Msp patch was created which
allows the user to draw freehand lines, which are converted into break
point function data and used as to generate a melodic profile in Bach.
This is further processed into a pentatonic scale. Once input the system
plays the resulting melody back. A notable flaw of the system was that
it required users to draw shapes in a generally horizontal fashion for
the data to be of use and to create a strong relationship between the
visuals and the generated music.

-  

   -  

      -  *** *Sonicsketch - shape recognition*
             :PROPERTIES:
             :CUSTOM_ID: sonicsketch---shape-recognition
             :END:

A separate application was created in Processing which allowed users to
draw shapes, using either mouse or ideally, pen input and have a sound
that is associated with each shape played back. As the sound of each
shape plays back, it is lit up using animation, creating a strong
connection between the shape and it's resulting sound. The application
used the "gesture variation follower" system (Caramiaux et al. 2015),
which while promising in principle, didn't have a high rate of accuracy
in recognizing the shapes. It is for this reason that Microsoft's ink
api is now being used for further prototyping.

-  

   -  ** /*Actual build out*/
         :PROPERTIES:
         :CUSTOM_ID: actual-build-out
         :END:

      -  *** *Advantages of the react.js model of UI programming*
             :PROPERTIES:
             :CUSTOM_ID: advantages-of-the-react.js-model-of-ui-programming
             :END:

-  * *Evaluation [0/1]*
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: evaluation-01
     :END:

-  [ ] Come up with a better title.

-  * *Conclusions and further work*
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: conclusions-and-further-work
     :END:

-  * *References*
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: references
     :END:

Bell, Adam, Ethan Hein, and Jarrod Ratcliffe. 2015. “Journal on the Art
of Record Production : The Evolution of Music Production Software User
Interface Metaphors.”
[[http://arpjournal.com/beyond-skeuomorphism-the-evolution-of-music-production-software-user-interface-metaphors-2/]].

Caramiaux, Baptiste, Nicola Montecchio, Atau Tanaka, and Frédéric
Bevilacqua. 2015. “Adaptive Gesture Recognition with Variation
Estimation for Interactive Systems.”/ ACM Transactions on Interactive
Intelligent Systems (TiiS)/ 4 (4): 18.

Duignan, Matthew. 2008. “Computer Mediated Music Production: A Study of
Abstraction and Activity.”

Popova, Maria. 2012. “10 Rules for Students, Teachers, and Life by John
Cage and Sister Corita Kent.”/ Brain Pickings/.
